+++
date = 2022-07-31
title = "Upgrade Bash with Bash-It & Ble.sh"
description = "In this post, I walk through the Bash-It and Ble.sh projects, their features, and how they help users power-up their bash shell."
+++

## Bash

For those who are not familiar, 
[Bash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)) is a Unix shell that is 
used as the default login shell for most Linux distributions. This shell and 
command proecssor should be familiar if you've used Linux (or older version of 
macOS) before.

However, bash is not the only option - there are numerous other shells that 
exist. Here are some popular examples:

- [zsh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_shell)
- [fish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fish_(Unix_shell))
- [oksh](https://github.com/ibara/oksh)
- [mksh](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Mksh)
- [dash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debian_Almquist_shell)

While each shell has its differences, bash is POSIX compliant and the default 
for many Linux users. Because of this, I am going to explore a program called 
`bash-it` below that helps bash users increase the utility of their shell 
without installing a completely new shell.

### Installation

First, if bash is not already installed on your system, you can [download bash 
from GNU](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/) or use your package manager to 
install it.

For example, this is how you'd install bash on Fedora Linux:

```sh
sudo dnf install bash
```

If you are not using bash as your default shell, use the `chsh` command to 
change your shell:

```sh
chsh
```

You should see a prompt like the one below. If the brackets (`[]`) contain 
`bash` already, you're done and you can simply continue by hitting the Enter 
key.

If the brackets contain another shell path (e.g. `/usr/bin/zsh`), enter the path 
to the bash program on your system (it's most likely located at 
`/usr/bin/bash`).

```sh
Changing shell for <user>.
New shell [/usr/bin/bash]:
```

You must logout or restart the machine in order for the login shell to be 
refreshed. You can do it now or wait until you're finished customizing the 
shell.

```sh
sudo reboot now
```

## Bash-it

As noted on the [Bash-it](https://github.com/Bash-it/bash-it) repository:

> Bash-it is a collection of community Bash commands and scripts for Bash 3.2+. 
> (And a shameless ripoff of oh-my-zsh 😃)

Bash-it makes it easy to install plugins, set up aliases for common commands, 
and easily change the visual theme of your shell.

### Installation

To install the framework, simply copy the repository files and use the 
`install.sh` script provided. If you want, you can (and should!) inspect the 
contents of the installation script before you run it.

```sh
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/Bash-it/bash-it.git ~/.bash_it
~/.bash_it/install.sh
```

If you didn't restart your session after making bash the default, and are 
currently working within another shell, be sure to enter a bash session before 
using `bash-it`:

```sh
bash
```

### Aliases

Bash-it contains a number of aliases for common commands to help improve 
efficiency in the terminal. To list all available options, use the following 
command:

```sh
bash-it show aliases
```

This will provided you a list that looks like the following text block. Within 
this screen, you will be able to see all available options and which ones are 
currently enabled.

```txt
Alias                Enabled?   Description
ag                   [ ]        the silver searcher (ag) aliases
ansible              [ ]        ansible abbreviations
apt                  [ ]        Apt and dpkg aliases for Ubuntu and Debian distros.
atom                 [ ]        Atom.io editor abbreviations
bash-it              [ ]        Aliases for the bash-it command (these aliases are automatically included with the "general" aliases)
bolt                 [ ]        puppet bolt aliases
bundler              [ ]        ruby bundler
clipboard            [ ]        xclip shortcuts
composer             [ ]        common composer abbreviations
curl                 [x]        Curl aliases for convenience.
...
```

To enable an alias, do:

```sh
bash-it enable alias  <alias name> [alias name]... -or- $ bash-it enable alias all
```

To disable an alias, do:

```sh
bash-it disable alias <alias name> [alias name]... -or- $ bash-it disable alias all
```

### Plugins

Similar to aliases, plugins are available with bash-it. You can find a complete 
list of plugins in the same way as aliases. Simply execute the following:

```sh
bash-it show plugins
```

You will see the following output showing enabled and disabled plugins:

```txt
Plugin               Enabled?   Description
alias-completion     [ ]
autojump             [ ]        Autojump configuration, see https://github.com/wting/autojump for more details
aws                  [ ]        AWS helper functions
base                 [x]        miscellaneous tools
basher               [ ]        initializes basher, the shell package manager
battery              [x]        display info about your battery charge level
blesh                [ ]        load ble.sh, the Bash line editor!
boot2docker          [ ]        Helpers to get Docker setup correctly for boot2docker
browser              [ ]        render commandline output in your browser
```

To enable a plugin, do:

```sh
bash-it enable plugin  <plugin name> [plugin name]... -or- $ bash-it enable plugin all
```

To disable a plugin, do:

```sh
bash-it disable plugin <plugin name> [plugin name]... -or- $ bash-it disable plugin all
```

### Themes

There are quite a few pre-defined 
[themes](https://bash-it.readthedocs.io/en/latest/themes-list/#list-of-themes) 
available with bash-it.

To list all themes:

```sh
ls ~/.bash_it/themes/
```

To use a new theme, you'll need to edit `.bashrc` and alter the `BASH_IT_THEME` 
variable to your desired theme. For example, I am using the `zork` theme.

```sh
nano ~/.bashrc
```

```sh
export BASH_IT_THEME='zork'
```

Once you save your changes, you just need to exit your terminal and create a new 
one in order to see your changes to the `.bashrc` file. You can also `source` 
the file to see changes, but I recommend starting a completely new shell 
instead.

## ble.sh

One big feature I was missing in Bash that both `zsh` and `fish` have is an 
autosuggestion feature. To explain: as you type, an autosuggestion feature in 
the shell will offer suggestions in a lighter font color beyond the characters 
already typed. Once you see the command you want, you can click the right arrow 
and have the shell auto-complete that line for you.

Luckily, the [Bash Line Editor](https://github.com/akinomyoga/ble.sh) (ble.sh) 
exists! This program provides a wonderful autosuggestions feature perfectly, 
among other features that I haven't tested yet.

In order to install ble.sh, execute the following:

```sh
git clone --recursive https://github.com/akinomyoga/ble.sh.git
make -C ble.sh install PREFIX=~/.local
echo 'source ~/.local/share/blesh/ble.sh' >> ~/.bashrc
```

Again, exit the terminal and open a new one in order to see the newly-configured 
shell.

## Restart the Session

Finally, as mentioned above, you'll need to restart the session to ensure that 
your user is using bash by default.

You will also need to exit and re-open a shell (e.g., terminal or terminal tab) 
any time you make changes to the `.bashrc` file.

```sh
sudo reboot now
```
