+++
date = 2022-12-31
title = "Stoicism"
description = ""
draft = true
+++

## Zeno of Citium

Stoicism is one such school of philosophy, originally founded by a Hellenistic
philosopher by the name of Zeno of Citium. Unfortunately, none of Zeno's
original works survived the test of time, leading modern perspectives of
Stoicism to be based largely on retellings and interpretations of Zeno's
teachings.

Zeno took his knowledge of Hellenistic philosophy and the Cynics and emphasized
human virtue related to peace of mind and goodness. These thoughts were often
intertwined with nature and living according to the natural flow of life.

Zeno's main work, the _Republic_, illustrates "a Stoic Utopia of rational
citizens". In such a society of rational beings, there would be no need for
things such as religion, litigation, or money.

## Core Beliefs

### Common Rights

Even further, the Stoics were staunch proponents of sexual equality between men 
and women - striking down any rules of "modesty" relating to clothing or choice 
in partners [^1].

### Slavery

I want to touch on one point that various Stoics have repeated throughout 
history: that slavery is unnatural and should be opposed [^1]. One of
the more prominent quotes comes from Seneca's Letter XLVII to Lucilius, "On
Master and Slave":

> “‘They are slaves,’ people declare. Nay, rather they are men. ... Kindly
> remember that he whom you call your slave sprang from the same stock, is
> smiled upon by the same skies, and on equal terms with yourself breathes,
> lives, and dies. It is just as possible for you to see in him a free-born man
> as for him to see in you a slave. As a result of the massacres in Marius’s
> day, many a man of distinguished birth, who was taking the first steps toward
> senatorial rank by service in the army, was humbled by fortune, one becoming a
> shepherd, another a caretaker of a country cottage. Despise, then, if you
> dare, those to whose estate you may at any time descend, even when you are
> despising them.” (1, 10)

## References

[^1]:
    https://web.archive.org/web/20080107034842/http://www.sensiblemarks.info/zeno.html

[^2]:
    https://howtobeastoic.wordpress.com/2017/10/19/stoic-qa-what-about-slavery/
